---
title: "Intro: Do Dollars Drive Dynasties?"
date: 2025-04-19 23:00:00 +0000
categories: [Intro + Methodology]
tags: []
author: [joshua, eric, nathan]
---

The modern era of sports is increasingly viewed through a financial lens. Blockbuster free agent signings, massive TV deals, ballooning team payrolls, and even the price of stadium concessions dominate conversations dominate the larger discussion more so than the results of actual games. These blog's will investigate the relationship between financial investment and team success in three major North American professional leagues: the National Basketball League (NBA), Major League Baseball (MLB), and National Football League (NFL). Specifically, we ask:

> _Does higher spending translate to wins and championships?_

---

### The Business of Sports

- **Baseball** built the financial bedrock of American sports.
- **Football** scaled for massive revenue and national appeal.
- **Basketball** now drives innovation through global reach and player-driven economics.

While it's often assumed that _money buys wins_, league-specific dynamics like salary caps, revenue sharing, and different playoff structures challenge that idea. This blog aims to quantify the relationship between team payroll and success across sports and explores if a championship can be bought.

---

### Methodology

We took a data-driven approach to examine team spending and success from 2015 to 2024.

#### Data Decisions

- Focused on **team-level** data to reflect organizational spending and outcomes
- Analyzed **10 years** across the NBA, MLB, and NFL for balance between scope and feasibility
- Evaluated **regular season records, playoff wins, and team efficiency** metrics

Wins serve as our anchor for measuring success since it is a universal, intuitive, and meaningful metric across generations and league structures.

#### Inspiration

Several previous studies informed the development of our methodology:

- _Rijal et al. (2023)_ conducted a similar analysis of payroll and performance data in the MLB and the NBA while _Jang (2018)_ examined salary distribution across two baseball leagues: MLB and the Korean Baseball Organization (KBO). These studies provided valuable insights into comparing salary distribution and team performance across different leagues.
- Visualizations presented in a _Wall Street Journal article (Diamond, 2025)_ on baseball salary distribution inspired some of our graphical representations.
- _Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game (Lewis, 2003)_ analyzed the Oakland Athletics and how they were able to compete for World Series despite a vastly different economic situation.

#### Financial Variables

- Team payrolls _(adjusted when needed)_
- League-specific economic rules:
  - Salary caps & floors
  - Luxury tax thresholds
  - Revenue sharing systems

Using visualizations and predictive modeling, we compare how spending shapes success in different leagues.

---

### Evaluation Strategy

A successful outcome will:

- Identify the **strength of correlation** between spending and winning
- Compare **differences by league**
- Surface the **impact of financial policies** (e.g., cap limits or soft/hard structures)

### What's Next?

In future posts, we’ll dive deeper into each league.

Stay tuned as we reveal whether deep pockets truly build champions or if smart spending and structure matter more.

[Spending vs. Success: A Cross-League Look at Sports Team Performance]({% post_url 2025-04-19-x-league %})

[Can Money Buy a Pennant? Baseball’s Spending Rules Explained]({% post_url 2025-04-19-mlb %})

[Superteams and The Supermax: Basketball’s Money Game]({% post_url 2025-04-19-nba %})

[Lifting the Lombardi: The Financial Blueprint Behind Super Bowl Champions]({% post_url 2025-04-19-nfl %})

---
